#LyX 1.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 221
\textclass article
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 0
\use_natbib 0
\use_numerical_citations 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Title

RGtk2 - A GUI Toolkit for R
\layout Section

Introduction
\layout Subsection

Motivation
\layout Standard

RGtk2 enables the R programmer to construct graphical user interfaces with
 GTK+, a GUI toolkit that is very commonly used by linux desktop applications
 and so is popular with the open-source community.
 The R platform greatly benefits from access to GTK+ in that it allows novice
 users, such as biologists, to capitalize on the analytical functionality
 of R, without the hindrance of the learning curve associated with a console-dri
ven interface.
 For example, a graphical interface could guide a biologist through a microarray
 data analysis task driven by Bioconductor.
 GTK+ is a vast improvement over the existing GUI toolkit for R, tcl/tk,
 as GTK+ is more advanced and, by virtue of its popularity in open-source
 applications, is capable of integrating interface functionality from a
 wide-range of other projects, including GGobi and Mozilla Firefox.
\layout Subsection

Background
\layout Standard

The original RGtk, based on the now obsolete GTK+ version 1.2, was developed
 by Duncan Temple Lang.
 About 4 years ago, GTK+ 1.2 was overhauled and renamed to GTK2.
 The fundamental GTK object system was abstracted into a separate library
 called GObject, part of GLib.
 GTK2 also takes advantage of the new font rendering library, Pango.
 Many widgets were added, removed, and heavily altered.
 GTK2 has more sophisticated widgets, prettier text, and a more elegant
 foundation than its predecessor.
 RGtk2 is an attempt to catch up with the evolution of GTK+.
 The goal is virtually complete support for the latest version of GTK2 (2.8.0)
 and its underlying libraries.
\layout Subsection

Scope
\layout Standard

GTK2 is dependent upon a collection of libraries, all of which RGtk2 aims
 to bind to R.
\layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000

GLib: Handles common tasks such as string manipulation, linked lists, event
 looping, etc.
\layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000

GObject: Contains object and dynamic type system, including properties and
 signals.
\layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000

ATK: Defines a common interface for accessibility technologies, implemented
 by GTK.
\layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000

Cairo: Vector graphics library with which GTK+ widgets are drawn.
\layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000

Pango: Renders text, with full support for internationalization.
\layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000

GDK: Handles interaction with native window system, including drawing and
 events.
\layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000

GdkPixbuf: Renders pixbufs, integrated with GDK.
\layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000

GTK: Provides the widgets for the GUI.
\layout Standard

Except for the first two, GLib and GObject, all of these libraries are fully
 bound to R by RGtk2.
 GLib and GObject are partially bound to the extent necessary for support
 of the others.
 A library binding consists of several components:
\layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000

Functions: All functions are wrapped with automatic type conversion of the
 parameters and return value(s).
 
\layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000

Fields: The values for fields of non-opaque structures are retrieved and
 converted.
 This is read-only access.
\layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000

Callbacks: User R functions are wrapped as typed C callback functions.
\layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000

Converters: Library-specific types may require special conversion.
\layout Section

Design
\layout Subsection

Goals
\layout Standard

The design goals of the project are two-fold.
 First, the bindings must be complete and consistent with the bound API.
 This simplifies documentation in that there is a more-or-less one-to-one
 correspondence between RGtk functions and the API functions.
 This also ensures that the R programmer has complete control over the API
 without any gaps or deficiencies in functionality.
 Whatever the C programmer can do, the R programmer should be able to do.
 Second, interaction with RGtk must be simple and familiar to the R programmer.
 Foreign C concepts such as memory management, return-by-reference parameters,
 and type casting must be hidden or adapted to their R equivalent.
 The user should be able to enjoy the benefits of GTK+ without knowing that
 it is implemented in a foreign language.
\layout Subsection

Central Problem
\layout Standard

Given the broad scope of the project, it is obvious that manual implementation
 of the bindings would be extremely tedious and time consuming.
 In order to avoid this, much of the code was autogenerated.
 Autogeneration also enhances the maintainability of the project, since
 improved code can be uniformly and automatically generated across all cases.
\layout Standard

GTK+ and other GObject-based API's are defined according to a scheme-based
 format called 
\emph on 
defs
\emph default 
.
 The definitions describe an API's object hierarchy, function names, parameter
 types, structure fields, etc.
 They are annotated with information that assists in more subtle aspects,
 such as memory management.
 The most mature GTK+ language binding, pygtk, maintains a set of reference
 
\emph on 
defs
\emph default 
 files and provides python scripts for their generation and parsing.
 RGtk employs these scripts for parsing the 
\emph on 
defs
\emph default 
 files via RSPython.
 The result is converted to R and C binding code through the use of a code
 generation library implemented in R.
 The 
\emph on 
defs
\emph default 
 format was overhauled along with GTK+ in the transition to GTK2, and it
 contains much more information than was provided to the original RGtk.
 However, there are still a small number of functions that require manual
 implementation, usually in the case of complicated memory management.
\layout Subsection


\emph on 
Defs
\emph default 
 Shortcomings
\layout Standard

The annotated definitions are very helpful in generating code.
 Unfortunately, the pygtk authors manually implement a large portion of
 their bindings, so they rely less on the 
\emph on 
defs
\emph default 
 information.
 The pygtk definitions, therefore, are buggy and do not contain all of the
 information necessary to come close to completely generating all of the
 bindings automatically.
\layout Standard

The first task of building RGtk was the cleaning and annotating of the 
\emph on 
defs
\emph default 
 files.
 An example of an annotation is the specification of a parameter as in,
 out, or in-out.
 This allows the code generator to know when to accept a parameter as input
 to a function and when to only return it as part of the result.
 Other additions include defining explicit callback types for generating
 wrappers and specifying the types of linked list elements, which is useful
 for type conversion.
 Some of these modifications were not explicitly supported by the 
\emph on 
defs
\emph default 
 specification, but nor were they disallowed.
 The pygtk parsers were extended to handle the new features, since they
 were written only to handle the subset of the specification employed by
 the pygtk definitions.
 
\layout Subsection

Type Conversion
\layout Standard

Every component of the bindings requires type conversion to some extent.
 The code generator attempts to write code that converts C types to and
 from R.
 Primitive types, such as double [numeric], int [integer], and char* [character]
, are perhaps the simplest to convert.
 Opaque structures such as GObjects and 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

boxed
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 types are passed to R as externalptr's, with the class attribute set to
 a character vector representing the type hierarchy of the object.
 Collections of these types, in the form of arrays and linked lists, are
 simply converted by iterating over the data structures.
 The original version of RGtk supported this functionality, except for linked
 lists and some array types.
\layout Standard

A more complicated problem that RGtk2 attempts to solve is the conversion
 of simple, transparent C structures that are normally initialized manually
 and therefore lack a constructor.
 This problem could be solved in at least two ways.
 First, a function could be added that serves as a constructor for the structure.
 Unfortunately, this would break the strict adherence to the API, since
 a new function is introduced.
 Also, this solution violates the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

spirit
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 of the API's design.
 The simple structures are meant to be initialized and manipulated without
 the extra baggage of function calls.
 Given these disadvantages, the alternative is favored: allowing the user
 to define an instance of such a type as an R list which is automatically
 converted to the corresponding C structure when passed to a wrapped function.
 When an instance of such a type is returned from a function, it is converted
 to its R list equivalent, preserving symmetry.
\layout Standard

For example, suppose a user wished to construct an instance of GdkColor,
 a structure describing an RGB color with fields red, green, and blue.
 The following code would yield the color red: 
\emph on 
c(65535, 0, 0)
\emph default 
.
 Here the fields for red, green, blue must be specified in the same order
 as they occur in the C structure definition.
 If the user desires an alternative order or does not wish to specify all
 of the fields (they default to zero), then the list should be named according
 to the field names in the C structure.
 For example, red could be specified as 
\emph on 
c(red=65535)
\emph default 
.
\layout Subsection

Memory Management
\layout Standard

Memory management in GObject-based libraries is based on the data type.
 GObjects are reference counted, while boxed types are explicitly freed
 after use.
 The memory persistence of other structures is either freed on demand, based
 on reference counting, or is handled internally.
 Finalizer functions for the boxed types are specified in the 
\emph on 
defs
\emph default 
.
 The code generator registers these as the finalizers for the corresponding
 externalptr in R.
 The reference counting of objects is also handled automatically.
 Other structures may be special-cased in the generator or dealt with manually.
 
\layout Standard

All of these mechanisms are dependent on whether RGtk 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

owns
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 the memory of a returned value, which is also specified in the 
\emph on 
defs
\emph default 
 files.
 For example, if RGtk owns an object's memory, it does not need to increase
 the reference count.
 If RGtk does not own an instance of a boxed type, then it should not register
 its externalptr for finalization.
 One shortcoming of the 
\emph on 
defs
\emph default 
 format is that it is not possible to specify the ownership of memory returned
 by reference, so these cases must be dealt with using heuristics and manual
 implementation.
\layout Subsection

Adapting to R
\layout Standard

Memory management is just one of the annoyances of C that R programmers
 are happy to avoid.
 One example is the need to specify the lengths of arrays (including strings)
 when passing them to functions, unless it is assumed that the arrays are
 NULL-terminated.
 The code generator uses heuristics to identify these parameters and does
 not require R to provide them.
 The wrapping code determines the length of arrays automatically.
 Another complication is the ability of C to return values by reference.
 These parameters, in addition to the return value, are returned to R compiled
 as a list.
 This avoids trying to emulate the foreign concept of return-by-reference
 in R.
 As a final example, certain errors that occur in GLib-based libraries are
 described by a returned GError structure.
 In R, libraries often alert the user to a problem via a printed warning.
 The RGtk2 user may specify whether to print such a warning when a GError
 is returned by passing a parameter to the wrapped function.
 If printing is not requested, the user can still inspect the list structure
 containing the fields of the GError.
\layout Section

Other Issues
\layout Subsection

The Event Loop
\layout Standard

Many GTK2 widgets have complex behavior that requires the execution of timeout
 and idle tasks.
 In order to reliably invoke these tasks, the GTK event loop must be the
 primary R event loop.
 The strategy to achieve this depends on the platform.
 On Linux, the REventLoop package by Duncan Temple Lang provides a framework
 for replacing the default Read-Eval-Print Loop with a foreign loop, without
 losing control of the console.
 RGtk2 provides a GTK2 (actually GLib 2.x) implementation for the REventLoop
 package.
 On Windows, the solution is somewhat simpler.
 The tcl/tk package invokes a function named 
\emph on 
tcl_do
\emph default 
 when it is waiting for console input, so that it can still respond to tcl/tk
 events.
 RGtk simply redefines 
\emph on 
tcl_do
\emph default 
 so that it checks for GTK events instead.
 Both of these solutions are satisfactory, but they are kind of ugly hacks.
\layout Subsection

Compatibility
\layout Standard

The GTK+ API is in constant flux; it changes with each minor version.
 RGtk must somehow accomodate the many different versions without overly
 complicating the code generation process.
 For example, one solution would be to autogenerate code with preprocessor
 directives allowing conditional compilation based on the user's GTK version.
 However, this would greatly complicate the process.
 It also would not account for the R side of the wrappers.
 Instead, the RGtk code was simply branched, so that as of this writing
 three minor versions of GTK are supported (2.8.0, 2.6.0, and 2.4.0).
 As GTK and RGtk advance, the previously branched versions will continue
 to be maintained by merging version independent code enhancements between
 them.
 
\layout Section

Additional API Support
\layout Subsection

iWidgets
\layout Standard

Simon Urbanek's iWidgets is an attempt to establish a simple API for quickly
 constructing GUI's in R.
 It is very minimalistic and thus it should be relatively straightforward
 to provide iWidget implementations based on any mature widget toolkit.
 In theory, it should allow the R programmer to easily create a native GUI
 without concern for any quirks or minutia associated with a particular
 platform or toolkit.
 The programmer should be able to focus on the statistics without getting
 bogged down in GUI building.
 RGtk2 provides a GTK2 implementation of iWidgets, which is perhaps as close
 as one can get to native support on Linux.
\layout Subsection

Extra Libraries
\layout Standard

Two additional GTK-related libraries are included with RGtk2.
 The first is libglade, which allows one to create a GUI by reading an XML
 specification at runtime.
 The Glade graphical GUI builder exports this XML, so even someone with
 little GUI programming experience can quickly and easily construct a complex
 interface.
 Also, RGtk2 includes GtkMozEmbed bindings for embedding a Mozilla Firefox
 renderer into an RGtk2 application.
 This demonstrates the usefulness of binding to a toolkit that is used by
 many major open source applications.
\layout Section

Conclusion
\layout Standard

In short, RGtk2 has achieved its goals of being complete and consistent
 without sacrificing simplicity and familiarity to the R programmer.
 A total of eight libraries are completely (and two more partially) bound
 to R.
 Every attempt is made to keep a one-to-one correspondence with the C API.
 Technologies such as glade and iWidgets greatly simplify the task of creating
 GUI's using RGtk2.
 Finally, foreign C concepts like memory management are avoided and assimilated,
 ensuring that the learning curve for an R developer is as shallow as possible.
\the_end
